[Moreno 2014, "Re-designing Program Animation. From tools’ roles to new learning activities" (dissertation, University of Eastern Finland)](http://epublications.uef.fi/pub/urn_isbn_978-952-61-1543-6/urn_isbn_978-952-61-1543-6.pdf):

> ABSTRACT
> 
> Learning programming successfully requires not only the acquisition of knowledge, but also skills and attitudes. Program animation tools have been developed for students to help gaining the required skills and knowledge by means of visualizing the various aspects of program execution. Despite developers’ and researchers’ intentions, the learning impact of program animation tools does not correspond to long-term efforts in developing and researching them. While learning impact has mostly been quantitatively evaluated, the process in which students acquire the knowledge and skills using program animation tools is not documented in detail. In particular, the learning impact of Jeliot 3, a program animation tool, has been assessed quantitatively and Jeliot 3 has proved its effectiveness for certain cohorts of students – those not very strong nor very weak. However, reasons and processes of why Jeliot 3 may improve students’ learning are only suggested in previous research.
> 
> In this thesis, the challenges faced by students when using Jeliot 3 to learn programming have been looked deeply at. The conducted observations have directed the development of new prototypes derived from Jeliot 3, and of new learning activities based on the tool. The research follows a systems development methodology as it is centered in the creation of an efficient artifact to teach programming. Two qualitative studies of English and Tanzanian students using Jeliot 3 prompted the development of several prototypes: Jeliot Adaptive, Jeliot with Explanations, and Jeliot Conflictive Animations. Two of the prototypes, Jeliot with Explanations and Jeliot Conflictive Animations, were empirically evaluated using a between-subject design with pre-tests and post-tests to assess the impact the prototypes had on the students’ learning.
> 
> The qualitative studies revealed the roles the animation tool could take when used by a student learning a new programming concept. Five roles were identified: empty, exploring, confusing, teaching, and evaluating. The roles of the tool were adopted by the students at different stages in the student’s learning path. To promote the importance of the animations and to avoid the empty role of the tool, conflictive animations were devised. Conflictive animations require the student to find the errors contained in the animation, rather than in the code. However, the empirical evaluation only showed a modest gain in effectiveness when learning about class inheritance using Jeliot Conflictive Animation compared to normal Jeliot 3. In another prototype, Jeliot with Explanations, explanations were added to the animations produced by Jeliot 3. It was found that the explanations were more effective when placed after the animation, rather than before the animation.
> 
> The field of program animation has been advancing gradually with iterations of the same idea: improving the interaction and information of animation tools that is presented to the students. These incremental innovations improve the learning impact of the tools, as in the case of Jeliot with Explanations. However, new approaches, like conflictive animations, are needed to advance the field in ways no imagined before. In this thesis, the foundation for future activities and animations based on conflictive animations are laid, and one of the possibilities is explored further: Jeliot ConAn. Conflictive animations, and errors in general, need to be explored further as a way to improve knowledge, skills and attitudes of programming students.

[end]
